+++
title = "KPZ World"

date = 2018-05-15
draft = false

tags = ["research", "kpz equation", "probability theory", "random matrix theory", "stochastic processes","kpz universality", "growth models","regularity structures", "rough path theory"]
summary = "Notes and references on topics that bear KPZ (Kardar-Parisi-Zhang) in the spirit."

[header]
image = ""
caption = ""

+++

This post is dedicated to collecting materials that are related to the KPZ equation. It is, in any measure, not complete. I just want to have a good repository for references on the subject. Also, it is a way for me to organize knowledge. 

## Introduction

Take me to [pookie](#pookie)




Despite this mathematical difficulty, the KPZ equation is expected to be a faithful description of the large scale properties of one-dimensional growth phenomena. This was the original motivation which led Kardar, Parisi and Zhang~\cite{bib:kpz} to study the equation and both experimental and theoretical physics arguments have, since then, confirmed their analysis. The rigorous study of the KPZ equation and its relation with the SHE has started with the work of Bertini and Giacomin~\cite{bib:bertiniGiacomin} on the scaling limit of the weakly asymmetric exclusion process (WASEP). Starting from this discrete Markov process on ${\{0,1\}}^\Z$ and performing a suitable space-time rescaling and recentering, they were able to prove that its density fluctuation field converges to a random field $u$ which is linked to the solution of the SHE by the Cole--Hopf transformation~\eqref{eq:CH-intro}. Incidentally they had to add exactly the strange $1/12$ drift in order to establish their result. Their work clarifies that any physically relevant notion of solution to the (still conjectural) equations~\eqref{eq:SBE-intro} and~\eqref{eq:KPZ-intro} needs to be transformed to the SHE by the Cole--Hopf transformation and also that the SBE should allow the law of the space white noise as invariant measure. A priori these insights are of little help in formulating KPZ/SBE, since given a solution to the SHE $Z$ it is not possible to apply It\^o's formula to $\lambda^{-1} \log Z$, and in particular the inverse Cole--Hopf transformation is ill-defined. It should be noted that the main difficulty of equations~\eqref{eq:SBE-intro} and~\eqref{eq:KPZ-intro} lies in the spatial irregularity and that no useful martingales in the space-variable are known, a fact which prevents an analysis via It\^o's stochastic integration theory. Moreover, the convergence result of~\cite{bib:bertiniGiacomin} relies strongly on the particular structure of the WASEP and does not  have many generalizations because most models behave quite badly under exponentiation (Cole--Hopf transformation); see~\cite{bib:demboTsai, bib:corwinTsai, bib:corwinShenTsai, bib:labbe} for examples of models that do admit a useful Cole--Hopf transformation.

After the work of Bertini and Giacomin there have been various attempts to study the SBE via Gaussian analysis tools taking into account the necessary invariance of the space white noise. A possible definition based on the Wick renormalized product associated to the driving space-time white noise has been ruled out because it lacks the properties expected from the physical solution~\cite{bib:chan}. Assing~\cite{bib:assing} has been the first, to our knowledge, to attempt a martingale problem formulation of the SBE. He defines a formal infinite-dimensional generator for the process, essentially as a quadratic form with dense domain, but is not able to prove its closability. The singular drift, which is ill-defined pointwise, make sense as a distribution on the Gaussian Hilbert space associated to the space white noise, however this distributional nature prevents to identify a suitable domain for the formal generator.

The martingale problem approach has been subsequently developed by Gon\c{c}alves and Jara~\cite{bib:gjEnergy, bib:goncalvesJara}\footnote{The paper~\cite{bib:goncalvesJara} is the revised published version of~\cite{bib:gjEnergy}.}. Their key insight is that while the drift in~\eqref{eq:SBE-intro} is difficult to handle in a Markovian picture (that is, as a function on the state space of the process) it makes perfect sense in a path-wise picture. They proved in particular that a large class of particle systems (which generalize the WASEP studied by Bertini and Giacomin) have fluctuations that subsequentially converge to random fields $u$ which are solutions of a generalized martingale problem for~\eqref{eq:SBE-intro} where the singular non-linear drift $\partial_x (u(t,x)^2)$ is a well defined  \emph{space-time} distributional random field. Avoiding to describe a Markovian generator for the process, they manage to introduce an auxiliary process which plays the same role in the formulation of the martingale problem. Subsequent work of Jara and Gubinelli~\cite{bib:gubinelliJara} gave a different definition of the martingale problem via a forward-backward description. The solution of the martingale problem is a Dirichlet process, that is the sum of a martingale and a finite variation process. This property and the forward-backward decomposition of the drift are reminiscent of Lyons--Zheng processes and in general of the theory of Markov processes described by Dirichlet forms, however a complete understanding of the matter is at the moment not well developed and the martingale problem formulation avoids the subtleties of the Markovian setting. Gon\c{c}alves and Jara called the solutions of this generalized martingale problem \emph{energy solutions} for the SBE/KPZ equation. 

Following~\cite{bib:goncalvesJara} it has been shown for a variety of models that their fluctuations subsequentially converge to energy solutions of the KPZ equation or the SBE, for example for zero range processes and kinetically constrained exclusion processes in~\cite{bib:goncalvesJaraSethuraman}, various exclusion processes in~\cite{bib:goncalvesSimon, bib:francoGoncalvesSimon, bib:blondelGoncalvesSimon, bib:goncalvesJaraLongrange}, interacting Brownian motions in~\cite{bib:diehlGubinelliPerkowski}, and Hairer-Quastel type SPDEs in~\cite{bib:gubinelliHQ}. This is coherent with the conjecture that the SBE/KPZ equation describes the universal behavior of a wide class of conservative dynamics or interface growth models in the particular limit where the asymmetry is ``small'' (depending on the spatial scale), the so called \emph{weak KPZ universality conjecture}, see~\cite{bib:corwin, bib:quastel, bib:quastelSpohn, bib:spohnSurvey}. In order to fully establish the conjecture for the models above, the missing step was a proof of uniqueness of energy solutions. This question remained open for some time during which it was not clear if the notion is strong enough to guarantee uniqueness or if it is too weak to expect well-posedness. Here we present a proof of uniqueness for the refined energy solutions of~\cite{bib:gubinelliJara}, on the full line and on the torus, thereby finally establishing the well-posedness of the martingale problem and its expected relation with the SHE via the Cole--Hopf transform. The proof follows the strategy developed by Funaki and Quastel in~\cite{bib:funakiQuastel}, namely we map a mollified energy solution to the stochastic heat equation via the Cole--Hopf transform and use a version of the Boltzmann--Gibbs principle to control the various error terms arising from the transformation and to derive the relation~\eqref{eq:CH-intro} in the limit as we take the mollification away. A direct corollary of our results is the proof of the weak KPZ universality conjecture for all the models in the literature which have been shown to converge to energy solutions.
 
Shortly after the introduction of energy solutions the fundamental work~\cite{bib:hairerKPZ} of Hairer on the KPZ equation appeared, where he established a path-wise notion of solution using Lyons' theory of rough paths to provide a definition of the non-linear term as a continuous bilinear functional on a suitable Banach space of functions. Existence and uniqueness were then readily established by fixed point methods. This breakthrough developed into a general theory of singular SPDEs, Hairer's theory of regularity structures~\cite{bib:hairerRegularity}, which provides the right analytic setting to control the singular terms appearing in stochastic PDEs like the SBE/KPZ equation, their generalizations, but also in other important SPDEs like the stochastic Allen--Cahn equation in dimensions $d=2,3$ and the (generalized) parabolic Anderson model in $d=2,3$. The work of the authors of this paper together with P. Imkeller on the use of paradifferential calculus~\cite{bib:paracontrolled} and the work of Kupiainen based on renormalization group (RG) techniques~\cite{bib:kupiainen, bib:kupiainenMarcozzi} opened other, alternative ways to tackle singular SPDEs. All these approaches have in common that they control the a priori ill-defined nonlinearities in the equation using path-wise (deterministic) arguments. However, from the point of view of the weak KPZ universality conjecture the path-wise approach is difficult to use and, for now, there are only few convergence results using either regularity structures, paracontrolled distributions or RG techniques~\cite{bib:hairerQuastel, bib:hairerShen, bib:kpzReloaded, bib:hoshino}. The martingale approach has the advantage that it is easy to implement, especially starting from discrete particle systems which often do not have the semi-linear structure that is at the base of the path-wise theories.

The main limitation of the martingale approach to the SBE/KPZ equation is that currently it works only at stationarity. Using tools from the theory of hydrodynamic limits it seems possible to extend the results to initial conditions with small relative entropy with respect to the stationary measure. However, this has not been done yet and dealing with even more singular initial conditions  is a completely open problem. On the other hand, with energy solutions it is relatively easy to work on the real line, while in the path-wise approach this requires dealing with weighted function spaces and the question of uniqueness seems still not clear.


asd fasd fds fasd das as <a name="pookie">ds fd fsd f</a>

To summarize, the main contribution of the present paper is a proof of uniqueness of energy solutions (in the refined formulation of Jara and Gubinelli~\cite{bib:gubinelliJara}) on the real line and on the torus. We start by introducing the notion of solution and the space of trajectories where solutions live in Section~\ref{sec:energySolutions}. Subsequently we discuss in Section~\ref{sec:additive} several key estimates available in this space, estimates which allow to control a large class of additive functional. After these preliminaries we show in Section~\ref{sec:proof} how to implement the Cole--Hopf transformation at the level of energy solutions and, by a careful control of some error terms, how to establish the It\^o formula which proves the mapping from the SBE to the SHE. Using the uniqueness for the SHE we conclude the uniqueness of energy solutions. In Appendix~\ref{app:periodic} we add some details on how to modify the proof to deal with the case of periodic boundary conditions.



## Rerefences


